Effect of Human Resource Policies on Employee Performance...A case study Paradise estate Abuja.


 
Table of Contents
CHAPTER ONE	3
1.1	Introduction	3
1.2 Problem of the study	3
1.3 Aim and Objectives	4
1.3.1 Aim	4
1.3.2 Objectives	4
1.4 Scope and Limitation	4
1.6 Significance of the Study	4
CHAPTER TWO	5
2.1 Human Resource Policies	5
2.2 Characteristics of HR Policy	6
2.3 Types of HR Policy	6
2.3.1 OVERALL POLICY	7
2.3.2 SPECIFIC POLICIES	8
2.4 Areas in which Human Resources Policies are implemented	13
2.4.1 Recruitment and Selection	13
2.4.2 Training and Development	14
2.4.3 Labour Welfare	14
2.4.4 Transfer and Promotion	14
2.4.5 Compensation	14
2.5 Formulating HR policies	15
2.6 Limitations of HR Policies	15
2.7 Employee Performance	16
2.8 Measuring Employee Performance	16
2.8 Human Resource Policies and Employee Performance	18
CHAPTER THREE	20
3.1	Introduction	20
3.2	Research Approach	20
3.3	Data Collection	21
3.3.1	Literature Review	21
3.3.2	Questionnaire Survey	21
3.4	Research Sample	21
3.4.1	Population	21
3.4.2	Sampling Method	22
3.5	Data Analysis	22
References	22


 


CHAPTER ONE
1.1	Introduction
Yearly reports and organisations’ statements all have the message that Human Resources are the most precious resource. The availability of the appropriate employees at the appropriate location and at the appropriate time is therefore essential to the success and survival of any particular organization (Jimoh & Abdulkadir, 2011). As described by (D. E. Guest, Michie, Conway, & Sheehan, 2003), A set of guidelines called "Human Resource Management" is intended to improve organizational integration, employee dedication, flexibility, and the quality of output. Three components of an employee's performance are often covered by HRM. Planning is the first step; it involves identifying the company's goals and hiring staff with the necessary talents to realize them. The second step is monitoring, which includes surveying, evaluating, and giving feedback, as well as training as necessary. Not to mention, remuneration. Any organization understands the value of showing appreciation for a job well done. It inspires workers, who are thus more productive and help the business reach its objectives as a result. Werbel and DeMarie (2005) assert that HRM practices develop processes that develop workers' knowledge and skills throughout the business to foster valued and distinctive organisational capabilities that support competitive advantage. In addition, Pfeffer (1995), further affirms that potentially the only source of long-term competitive advantage for a company comes from its HR policies. This highlights the significance of HR practices and the function they play in any corporation that wishes to succeed in both domestic and global commercial domains (Maina, 2017). D. Guest (1989) also noted that By enforcing required HR regulations, employers may retain talent and enhance work performance while reducing turnover, absenteeism, and complaints.
1.2 Problem of the study
There has been an increasing interest in the relationship between human resources management and the performance of the employees of an organization. It has been shown that human resource strategies may increase worker productivity and be a strategic advantage for any firm (Bonareri, 2019). Koch and McGrath (1996) affirm that Efficiency, motivation, contentment, and performance all depend on HR policy. These policies include chances for professional progression, training and development, equal and effective remuneration structures, and suitable promotion grades. Although human resource management is crucial for improving individual and organizational performance, many businesses in underdeveloped nations like Nigeria pay little attention to HRM in order to guarantee their employees' efficient performance. Some of the related studies done in this area include (Chelimo, 2017), (Bonareri, 2019), (Maina, 2017) from Kenya,  (Ologunde, Monday, & James-Unam, 2015), (Chukwuka & Nwakoby, 2018), (Ezejiofor, Peace, & Okoye, 2015). This study aims to further broaden the knowledge in this area by using a case study of a construction firm in Abuja.
1.3 Aim and Objectives
1.3.1 Aim
This study aims at investigating the effect of Human Resource Policies on employee performance at Paradise Estate Abuja. In line with this, the specific objectives are 
1.3.2 Objectives
1.	Establishing the current policies used at Paradise Estate Abuja
2.	Assessing the effect of HR policies on employee’s performance
3.	Assessing the perception of the employees on most effective policies
1.4 Scope and Limitation
This study focuses on getting information from non-managerial workers at Paradise Estate Abuja. The study will mainly focus on the Abuja branch. This is because of the limitations in terms of funding and geographical distance. 
1.6 Significance of the Study
This study is aiming to further improve the body of knowledge in human resource management in relation to human resource policies and practices and their effect on employee performance. This study would also benefit the managers of the organization.


CHAPTER TWO
2.1 Human Resource Policies
Armstrong (2014) defined HR policies as persistent instructions on how personnel should be handled inside the company. They outline the organization's concepts and ideals regarding how people should be handled, and it is from these that managers are supposed to act when it comes to HR-related issues. HR practices should be separated from policies. A policy outlines broad guidelines for how HR-related matters should be handled. A procedure outlines exactly how to handle significant workplace concerns including complaints, punishment, capacity, and redundancy.
Grobler and Warnich (2005) documented that the goal of Human Resource policies is to provide managers with direction in attaining HR-related goals, to define appropriate workplace conduct and behaviours, and to convey the organization's perspective on a particular topic. Barr (2020) further explained that Human resource (HR) policies are intended to give organizations the frameworks necessary to make choices consistently and to advance fairness in treating people fairly. Strong HR policies may support an organization's efforts to show that it complies with its obligations for employee regulation and corporate governance, as well as the diversity, ethics, and training needs of today's workplace. This can be done both internally and publicly. 
Takeuchi (2009) investigated at organizational performance policies at the business level by lining them up with human resource policies. He connected cost-cutting tactics with human resources policy by  Increasing the use of contingent part-time or short-term workers, Ensuring the availability of performance appraisal based on short-term in differentiation strategy, and other strategies. But the logical query is: Which human resource practices are crucial to connect with organizational effectiveness? Human resource policies are a collection of internally consistent procedures used by businesses to improve employee motivation, knowledge, and skills (Alkalha, Al-Zu'bi, Al-Dmour, Alshurideh, & Masa'deh, 2012). From ReferenceForBusiness (2022) perspective, HR policies should cover 
•	Equal Employment Opportunity policies
•	Employee classifications
•	Workdays, paydays, and pay advances
•	Overtime compensation
•	Meal periods and break periods
•	Payroll deductions
•	Vacation policies
•	Holidays
•	Sick days and personal leave (for bereavement, jury duty, voting, etc.)
•	Performance evaluations and salary increases
•	Performance improvement
•	Termination policies
2.2 Characteristics of HR Policy
According to (Rajsheka, 2012; Rastogi, 2020), the characteristics of hr policies are:
1.	The organization's human resource aim serves as the foundation for or a source of inspiration for human resource policy.
2.	They are broad generalizations that provide room for judgment since they are generic expressions of knowledge.
3.	They exhibit the acknowledged aims of senior management towards an organization's human resources.
4.	As they are the standing plans, they can be used again and again for personnel management
5.	In order for upper management to approve such policies, the human resources department must communicate with the line managers.
2.3 Types of HR Policy
Sandhya (2020), laid out the type of HR Policy as
Originated Policies: These are purposefully set up by high management to direct executive thought across multiple levels.
Appealed Policies: These policies were created to address the needs of a few unique circumstances that weren't addressed by the preceding regulations. Such demands typically came from subordinates who failed to manage the situations in accordance with the direction provided by the current policies.
Imposed Policies: The name of these policies makes it clear that they were created as a result of imposition or pressure from outside organizations like the government, unions, and trade groups.
General Policies: These policies represent the senior management's views and main goals in developing the overarching strategy for charting the organization's progress.
Specific Policies: These policies address certain concerns like recruiting, rewarding, and bargaining, as their name makes clear. However, such policies should adhere to the fundamental structure provided by the general policies.
According to Armstrong (2014), HR policies may be thought of as broad declarations of the company's values. The following lists the key elements that can be included in a general policy statement and particular policy topics.
2.3.1 OVERALL POLICY
The overall policy outlines the organization's attitudes toward its employees as well as how it fulfils its social obligations to them. It is an outward manifestation of its moral principles or views on how people ought to be treated.
The following notions may be mentioned openly or inferred from an overarching description of HR policies' values:
Equity: The relative allocation of authority and resources among significant internal organizational stakeholders, such as directors, executives, managers, and workers, is referred to as organizational equality. It is significant that an examination of organizational equality considers the existing unequal distribution of equity in society and is particularly focused on the experiences of people from historically underrepresented and under resourced groups (Johnson & Bonds, 2020).
Consideration: While making decisions that have an impact on an employee's prospects, security, or self-respect, individual circumstances are taken into consideration. It advocates that individual circumstances that affects the prospects, security or self-respect of employees should be taken into consideration while making decisions.(Armstrong, 2014; Dhungana, 2015; Sirbu & Alexandrescu, 2014)
Organizational learning: a conviction that all organization members should be supported in their learning and development by providing the necessary procedures and resources (Armstrong, 2014).
Performance through People: The Performance Through People Strategy (PTPS) seeks to guarantee that everyone in the organization is aware of their responsibilities and is capable of providing the greatest performance possible in order to give superior services (Charnwood, 2007). 
Work-life balance: attempting to offer workplace policies that let employees balance their job and personal commitments.
Quality of working life: intentionally and persistently seeking to better the standard of living while working. This entails boosting the sense of fulfilment that individuals feel from their job by, to the greatest extent feasible, lowering monotony, increasing diversity, autonomy, and responsibility, and avoiding overstressing people (Armstrong, 2014).
Working conditions: Maintaining a safe, healthy, workable, and enjoyable working environment is the focus of the working condition (Dhungana, 2015).
2.3.2 SPECIFIC POLICIES
Specific Human Resource Policies are policies that are tailored towards different aspects associated with management of Human Resources within an organization. This policy is region- or standard-specific. It addresses the policies pertaining to a certain human resources issue. Specific policies cover:
2.3.2.1 Equal Opportunity Policy
Armstrong (2014) documented that the organization's commitment to providing equal opportunities to everyone, regardless of sex, race, creed, handicap, age, or marital status, should be made clear in the equal opportunity policy. The policy should also explain how far the company is willing to use "affirmative action" to address disparities in the numbers of people hired based on factors like sex, colour, or degree of education and experience. Many organizations have documentations pertaining to this purpose. In the UK for example, The Equity Act 2010 makes it unlawful to discriminate against employees because of nine factors: age, disability, gender reassignment, marriage and civil partnership, pregnancy and maternity, race, religion or belief, sex, and sexual orientation (PeoplePointHR, 2018).
2.3.2.2 Managing Diversity Policy
As Jackson, May, and Whitney (1995) expressed, Diversity is the existence of variances among individuals within a social group. As organizations throughout the world become more varied in terms of the gender, colour, ethnicity, age, national origin, and other personal qualities of its members, diversity is becoming a more significant aspect in organizational life (Shaw & Barrett-Power, 1998). The idea that some features, such as accent, athletic prowess, and cultural heritage, are seen to be better indications of variety than others gives rise to the selectivity of diversity. Regarding context dependence, people may only be considered "different" in relation to other people in their surroundings, not in isolation (O'Donovan, 2018).
A policy on managing diversity recognizes that there are differences among employees and that these differences, if properly managed, will enable work to be done more efficiently and effectively. It does not focus exclusively on issues of discrimination, but instead concentrates on recognizing the differences between people (Armstrong, 2014).
2.3.2.3 Age and Employment Policy
In terms of age and employment, age is not a good indicator of how employees perform on their jobs (Boehm, Schröder, & Bal, 2021). As Armstrong (2014) pointed out, As more people live active, healthy lives as they age, it is deceptive to link physical and mental capacity with age. The policy needs to include the strategy the company uses to engage, promote, and train older personnel. It should stress that the main factor in hiring or promoting someone should be their aptitude for the position, and that the person would benefit from training regardless of age. Additionally, the policy should specify that neither internal nor external employment postings should have age restrictions.
2.3.2.4 Promotion Policy
An employee is eligible for a promotion under certain conditions, which are outlined in a promotion policy. These rules are created by the company's human resources department to provide workers clear, quantifiable objectives to meet in order to be promoted (Cooks-Campbell, 2022). 
A promotion policy might declare the organization's aim to promote internally whenever possible to meet its need for high calibre employees. However, the policy could acknowledge that there may be times when hiring people from outside the company is the only way to meet its present and future demands. One may argue that a healthy organization requires periodic injections of new blood in order to avoid stagnating. Additionally, the policy may stipulate that staff members will be encouraged to apply for internally advertised positions and won't be prevented from moving up by their managers, despite their possible reluctance to lose them. Danish and Usman (2010) argued that employee loyalty is fostered through equal and fair promotion opportunities that take into account their abilities and talents, which leads to improved productivity and job satisfaction. (Bonareri, 2019). 
2.3.2.5 Work-life Balance Policy
An employee's impression of the maintenance and integration of various personal time, family care, and work domains with the least amount of role conflict is known as work-life balance (Ungerson & Yeandle, 2005). According to Barik and Pandey (2016), the four family friendly HR practices are: Flextime: An employment agreement that allows for flexibility in start and finish times but requiring employees to complete a certain amount of core hours; Telework: Work-from-home arrangements allow employees to complete at least portion of their regularly planned hours while receiving compensation. To remain in touch with their employers, they use technology like a laptop or smartphone; Childcare Services: A variety of childcare support services, including information and referral services, assistance with external suppliers, or on-site centres; Eldercare services: a range of eldercare support services, such as on-site facilities, assistance with outside vendors, and information and referral services. Eldercare services were considered accessible for the purposes of this research if employees reported that their company provided the service.
2.3.2.6 Employee Development Policy
Since training results in superior performance in the same field and is a crucial component of the human resource department, training has become one of the necessary functions in the majority of organizations. It has a significant impact on an organization's success by enhancing both organizational and employee performance (Jagero, Dabale, & Nyauchi, 2014; Shaheen, Naqvi, & Khan, 2013). Mozael (2015) concluded that training activities help to increase employee capacities, skills, knowledge, and attitudes as long as training remains a key strategy or means of enhancing organizational performance. This is because trained employees do tasks more quickly and effectively than untrained workers.
The organization's commitment to the ongoing development of employees' skills and abilities could be represented in the employee development policy. This would allow the organization to make the most of every employee's contribution and give them the chance to develop their abilities, realize their potential, advance in their careers, and become more marketable both inside and outside the company (Armstrong, 2014).
2.3.2.7 Compensation Policy
Compensation is the advantage that employees receive in the form of salaries, wages, and other similar prizes in exchange for their increased performance (Hameed, Ramzan, Zubair, Ali, & Arslan, 2014). Gomez-Mejia, Balkin, and Cardy (2009) demonstrated that the rewards that workers can get in exchange for their work, whether they be monetary or non-monetary, are defined by the reward policy. Armstrong (2014) further suggested that reward policies should cover matters such as providing an equitable pay system; equal pay for work of equal value;  paying for performance, competence, skill or contribution; sharing in the success of the organization (gain sharing or profit sharing); the relationship between levels of pay in the organization and market rates; the provision of employee benefits, including flexible benefits if appropriate; the importance attached to the non-financial rewards resulting from recognition, accomplishment, autonomy, and the opportunity to develop.
2.3.2.8 Employee Involvement and Participation Policy
Employee involvement is a collection of actions meant to accomplish goals. Direct or indirect employee engagement is possible through representative organizations including works councils, joint consultative committees, and unions (Aranea, Begega, & Kohler, 2021). Triantafillidou and Koutroukis (2022) believed the majority of organizations adopt employee involvement techniques such as representative participation, financial participation, upward communication, two-way communication, downward communication, and upward communication. On Policies, Armstrong (2014) affirmed that It should be clear from the engagement and participation how much the company values providing its workers a voice in decisions that impact them. The means for employee voice should be specified, such as joint consultation and suggestion programs.
2.3.2.9 Employee Relations Policy
The organization's stance on employees' rights to express their concerns to management through labour unions, staff organizations, or other representation systems will be outlined in the employee relations policy. Additionally, it will discuss the organization's working principles with groups like trade unions, highlighting the fact that such relationships should be viewed as partnerships.
2.3.2.10 Recruitment and Selection Policy
Every successful firm must go through the recruitment and selection process since having the proper employees enhances and sustains organizational performance. Any organization's objective is to have their selection system have a positive impact on bottom-line business outcomes like productivity and financial performance (Adeyemi, Dumade, & Fadare, 2015). Beer, Spector, Lawrence, Mills, and Walton (1984) defined this policy as being critical in ensuring that new hires are attracted, kept, and managed effectively. The workforce as a whole is composed according to this policy. This policy enables a company to manage its desired culture and objectives by having the appropriate staff.
2.3.2.11 Health and Safety Policy
The goal of health and safety policies and programs is to safeguard employees from risks associated with their jobs or other connections to the company, as well as other persons who may be impacted by what the firm produces and does.
Programs for occupational health focus on preventing illnesses brought on by working circumstances. Both occupational medicine and occupational hygiene are components of these programs. Occupational medicine is a specialized branch of preventive medicine that deals with the diagnosis and prevention of health hazards at work as well as the treatment of any illness or stress that has developed despite taking preventive measures. Occupational hygiene is the domain of chemists, engineers, or ergonomists and is concerned with the measurement and control of environmental hazards (Armstrong, 2014).
2.3.2.12 Sexual Harassment Policy
Sexual harassment is unwanted sexual behaviour that is pervasive, offensive, and interferes with an employee's ability to execute their job duties or fosters a hostile, offensive, or intimidatory work environment (SHRM, 2022). Armstrong (2014) demonstrated that sexual harassment policy should state that 
•	Sexual harassment is not acceptable.
•	Sexually harassed employees will receive the necessary counselling, support, and advice.
•	Every effort will be taken to reach an informal agreement to fix the issue with the individual who was complained about.
•	If informal negotiations fail, assistance will be offered to the employee so they may file a formal complaint.
•	For the purpose of hearing allegations of sexual harassment, a separate procedure will be provided. This will allow workers to, if they so want, complain to a person of their own sex.
•	The handling of complaints shall be sensitive and in accordance with the legal rights of the accuser and the complainant.
•	Sexual harassment is viewed as grave workplace misbehaviour and, if proven, subjects the offender to immediate dismissal. For small offenses, less harsh punishments could be used, but there will always be a warning that repeat offenses will result in dismissal.
2.3.2.13 Substance Abuse Policy
According to Pidd, Kostadinov, and Roche (2016) substance abuse policy includes banning the use of drugs and alcohol at work, offering counselling to those who are impacted, and supporting drug testing. The policy significantly contributes to creating a productive workplace free from drug and alcohol abuse by employees. From Armstrong (2014) perspective, a substance abuse policy could include assurances that employees with drug addiction issues will receive counselling and support, if the employee cooperates fully, any reasonable absence from work required for treatment will be approved under the organization's sick leave policy.
2.4 Areas in which Human Resources Policies are implemented
There are several areas in which HR policies and processes are applied within various types of organizations. According to Kapur (2020), these areas are
2.4.1 Recruitment and Selection
Every business's basis is its employees, and building a strong foundation necessitates the creation of clever HR hiring and recruitment practices. Every HR department should have established procedures for how to post job openings, collect applications, pre-qualify applicants, and advance applicants through the recruiting process(Access, 2022). Forms including new position requisition forms, referral forms, and assessment forms are included in pre-hire policies. Create a formal onboarding procedure that includes W-4 tax forms. Think about standardizing the contract or offer letter, interview, and selection procedures (Holliday, 2021).
2.4.2 Training and Development
Developing staff development initiatives is essential since turnover is costly—according to some research, replacing a mid-level post might cost as much as 20% of the yearly wage. You can keep top talent from leaving your organization while boosting the financial performance of your business by giving employees and management access to employee training resources and clear career paths(Access, 2022). 
2.4.3 Labour Welfare
Industrial relations must be improved, and this requires implementing new regulations and processes. The major goal of labor welfare policy is to implement measures that would make it easier for workers to advance their positions. When issues and difficulties arise, it is important to employ the proper techniques. The promotion of mutual bargaining, the creation and implementation of labor welfare programs, and the organization of all facilities for health, education, and other welfare programs are all considered to be outcomes of labor welfare policies. In other words, the improvement of employees' health and education is the main aim of the labor welfare program (Kapur, 2020).
2.4.4 Transfer and Promotion
Members can be moved up and promoted within an organization. It is clear that all employees want to advance their careers, but this does not always need a move. Policies and procedures must be developed in order to implement transfer and promotion in the proper manner. These must examine elements like the reason for the transfer, the duration of the transfer, the reasons for the transfer, the availability of promotion possibilities, the elements that must be taken into account in order to get promotion opportunities, and the length of service with the company(Kapur, 2020).
2.4.5 Compensation
A government-sponsored program called worker's compensation provides financial compensation to employees who incur accidents and injuries while doing their occupations. The sort of insurance known as "worker's compensation" provides financial support for those who were injured or become disabled while working. In some circumstances, workers are given the option to sue their employers for negligence if they consent to receiving worker's compensation (Kagan, 2020).
2.5 Formulating HR policies
According to Armstrong (2014) the steps taken to formulate and implement HR Policies are:
•	Learn about the business culture and its guiding principles.
•	Analyze current regulations, both written and unwritten. Any organization will have HR rules, even if they are not explicitly defined but rather are implied.
•	Examine outside influences. The employment laws of the nation may have an impact on HR policy. Interested professional institutions' standards of conduct should also be checked.
•	Examine any places where new policies are required or where the current ones are insufficient.
•	Ask managers about their opinions on HR rules and how they may be changed, especially starting at the top.
•	Find out what the employees think about the HR rules, particularly how fair and equitable they are at their core and how they are applied consistently and equitably. Think about conducting this through a poll of attitudes.
•	Find out what union representatives think.
•	Prepare draft policies based on the information you gathered in the first seven steps.
•	Consult management and union representatives to discuss and reach an agreement on policies.
•	Deliver the policies together with any necessary implementation instructions (although they should be as self-explanatory as possible). Add some training to this communication.
2.6 Limitations of HR Policies
According to (Quain, 2018), there are several limitations to policies and they include:
Creates Rigid Structures: One drawback of organizational policies is that it may be challenging for you to execute changes due to the strict structure of corporate rules and regulations. Business regulations often have an inflexible and binary structure, which gives your personnel a tight framework. Additionally, it restricts your capacity for fast judgment calls or last-minute adjustments to your corporate plan.
Financial Investment: The cost involved in setting up the regulations in an organization is yet another drawback of workplace policies. Research, writing, and legal advice would have to be paid for whether it is outsourced or allocated internally. Ensuring compliance with all federal, state, and local regulations pertaining to employee privacy, safety, and health is one of the most important components of creating policies.
All business issues are outside the scope of policies. Management must create new policies whenever an unexpected circumstance occurs. Policies just define the boundaries of the decision-making process. They can't fully take the place of human judgment (Rastogi, 2020).
2.7 Employee Performance
Organizations and scholars alike have expressed serious concerns about how well people perform in relation to their employment. Organizations and scholars have been looking for various ways to boost or improve employees' performance for many years. As a result, according to its most basic definition, work performance is the employees' behaviors or activities in relation to the objectives or goals of the concerned business (Tabouli, Habtoor, & Nashief, 2016). According to Ogbogu and Sadamoro (2022) Employee productivity is the primary emphasis of employee performance, which measures how many units of acceptable quality an employee produces in a given amount of time. The effectiveness of an organization's or company's workforce is crucial.
2.8 Measuring Employee Performance
Accurate and unbiased employee performance measurement is the most challenging aspect of the performance evaluation policy (Bond, 2007). When evaluating an employee's performance, the major tasks they have performed and the accomplishments they have made over a specific period of time are compared to the objectives they were given at the beginning of the period (Rudman, 2010). Measuring also includes the level of success, adherence to the required criteria, associated expenditures, and time needed to achieve the objectives. Performance management and performance evaluation policies are based on measuring employee performance. In addition to serving as the foundation for an accurate performance evaluation, precise and effective performance assessment also paves the way for evaluating and assessing employee potential (Akinbowale, Lourens, & Junabhai, 2014). 
According to (Bonareri, 2019; Borman & Motowidlo, 1997), Employee performance can be measured using two element, Task and Contextual performance. Task performance is the efficiency with which individuals performing a task contribute to the technical core of the organization, either directly by implementing a portion of its technological process or indirectly by providing it with goods or services that it requires. Bonareri (2019) also made a point that Task proficiency comprises the capacity to create integrated and comprehensive, accuracy at work, expertise of the task assigned, attention to detail, and avoiding mistakes. 
Activities that an employee engages in that are beyond the scope of their regular work responsibilities are referred to as contextual performance. It is correlated with how much an employee contributes to the business (Bonareri, 2019). Contextual activities are significant because they improve organizational performance by influencing the social, psychological, and organizational context that drives task activities and processes. Volunteering for duties that aren't officially part of the job and working with others in the company to complete tasks are examples of contextual activities (Borman & Motowidlo, 1997).
Organizational Performance is usually indicated by indices such as:
•	Effectiveness: if the organization meets its objectives
•	Efficiency: if the organization uses the fewest possible resources to meet its objectives
•	Development: if the organization is developing in its capacity to meet future opportunities and challenges
•	Satisfaction: of all participants, stakeholders, employees, and customers
•	Innovation: for products and processes
•	Quality: percentage of products of high quality (Katou & Budhwar, 2007)
 
Relationship between HRM Policies and Organizational Performance. (Katou & Budhwar, 2007)

2.8 Human Resource Policies and Employee Performance
Bonareri (2019) Studied on the Perceived effect of Human Resource Policies on employee performance at a tea factory in Kenya. They examined Training and development, performance appraisal, Reward, recruitment and selection, health and safety, promotion, sexual harassment, substance abuse, grievance, and HIV/AIDS policies  and came to the conclusion that a majority of the HR policies established at the tea factory affect employee performance positively. Recruitment policies are not a true predictors of employee performance, but reward policies and raining are true predictors of employee performance. 
Manhotoma and Delly Mahachi (2014) Studied on HR policies on employee performance at two hotels in Botswana. They examined on reward systems, policy formation, communication and working hours. The research came to the conclusion that the present HR policies and procedures were ineffective since they were failing to get the greatest output from the workforce. However, Hotel B has to improve on most of its HRM policies and practices, notably those related to reward and recognition, as Hotel A's HR Policies are more established than those of Hotel B, likely as it is more established and serves to a more precise market. In addition, Employees should also have the authority to influence policy creation and decision-making.
Chelimo (2017) studied on the effect of HR policies on employee performance in a bank. She examined recruitment policy, appraisal policy and compensation policy. The research came to the conclusion that recruitment policy, appraisal policy and compensation policy all have effect on employees’ performance. 
Hazra, Sengupta, and Ghosh (2013) studied on the impact of HR policies on employee’s performance in some selected three-star hospitality organizations. The study found that many employees are only pleased with a few characteristics, and that several other characteristics connected to financial and non-financial HR policies need to be improved (e.g., Good physical working condition, Balance between work and person life, Satisfactory working enthusiasm, Company valued their employee etc.).
Khan (2015) examined human resource policies and performance of employees in Indian banks. The paper focused on 100 employees from one of the banks and came to the conclusion that policies had a positive impact and played a crucial role in an organization because they were correlated with employee performance. The study came to the conclusion that well-crafted HR policies inspire workers to put in extra effort and accomplish their goals.
Pule, Mwesigye, Kanyangabo, and Mbago (2014) studied the HR policies adopted by the management of Kampala University in Uganda and linking it to job satisfaction between expatriates and local staff. It was found that there was little difference in HR rules between the two groups of workers, but there was a reward policy difference that favoured expatriates. The investigation came to the conclusion that the university's award program needed to be simplified in order to ensure fairness.
Kwenin, Muathe, and Nzulwa (2013) determined if job satisfaction, incentives, and HR practices were important in keeping employees at Vodafone Ghana. 142 workers were surveyed for the study. It was discovered that effective compensation systems promote equity and have a high percentage of employee retention. The study came to the conclusion that supporting policies, such as chances for career advancement, performance evaluation, and promotion, had a beneficial impact on employee retention.
Ogbogu and Sadamoro (2022) examined the effect of compensation policy on employee performance in Ekiti State. 350 people of various background and in different organizations were surveyed. According to the study's findings, employees are more committed to the company when they are happy with their positions as a consequence of various financial and non-financial compensation packages. As a consequence, their work performance significantly improves. Therefore, it is essential for the business to create, nurture, and maintain alluring compensation plans that will keep workers happy and motivated in order to improve their long-term job performance.

CHAPTER THREE
3.1	Introduction
This chapter outlines the methodology utilized by the researcher to conduct the study, as well as the instruments and materials employed, in order to meet the goals, outlined in chapter one. This chapter covers the study methodology used, the sample population and size, data collecting, data analysis, questionnaire preparation and delivery, and research instruments.
3.2	Research Approach
Williams (2007) stated that there are three types of research approaches which are
1.	Quantitative approach (statistics based)
2.	Qualitative approach (description based)
3.	Mixed method approach (triangulation method)
Quantitative research is the main research method for this research work due to the nature of data required and examples from previous research done. 
3.3	Data Collection
Two data gathering strategies were used to acquire data for this research. Literature review and structured questionnaire are two of them. These are the Literature review and Structured questionnaire. 
3.3.1	Literature Review
Secondary data for this research was obtained from a comprehensive literature review, to gain an overview of human resource, human resource policies, types of human resource policies, areas where human resource policies are used, employee performance, measuring employee performance. The knowledge of the literature was subsequently used for the preparation of the questionnaire that was used in the questionnaire survey. 
3.3.2	Questionnaire Survey
Part 1: General information was used to obtain information regarding the respondents. Information assessed were
•	Gender
•	Age
•	Job Position
•	Job Type
•	Number of Years on the job
Part 2: Human Resource Policy: In this section, the respondents were made to answer questions on a scale of strongly disagree to strongly agree(Likert scale) that was used to determine the human resource policies used in the organization
Part 3: Employee performance: This section of the questionnaire also used the five-point scale of very low to very high to access the effect of human resource policy on employee performance
3.4	Research Sample
3.4.1	Population
This research population were non-managerial employees Paradise Estate Abuja. The total population of Paradise Estate Abuja is 70. From them, a total of 35 persons were targeted for the questionnaire
3.4.2	Sampling Method
Studying the whole of the population was cumbersome. Because of this, the researcher picked a representative sample of the whole population. For this study, a combination of proportional stratified sampling and simple random sampling techniques were used during the selection of the respondents. Proportional stratified sampling was used to select non-managerial workers while simple random sampling was used to give every non-managerial employee an equal chance of being picked. 
3.5	Data Analysis 
This research is descriptive as well as analytical. The hypotheses were evaluated using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences, and the first section of the questionnaire was analysed using descriptive statistics such as frequency counts and simple percentages.
References
Access. (2022). 5 HR Policies and Procedures Your Department Should Put in Place Now.  Retrieved from https://www.accesscorp.com/blog/5-human-resource-policies-to-initiate/
Adeyemi, O. S., Dumade, E. O., & Fadare, O. M. (2015). The Influence of Recruitment and Selection on Organizational Performance. International Journal of Advanced Academic Research - Social Sciences and Education 
Akinbowale, M., Lourens, M. E., & Junabhai, D. C. (2014). Employee Performance Measurement and Performance Appraisal Policy in an Organisation. Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences, 5(9), 342-347. 
Alkalha, Z. S., Al-Zu'bi, Z. b., Al-Dmour, H., Alshurideh, M., & Masa'deh, R. e. (2012). Investigating the Effects of Human Resource Policies on Organizational Performance: An Empirical Study on Commercial Banks Operating in Jordan EuroJournals, 45-64. 
Aranea, M., Begega, G., & Kohler, H. D. (2021). The European Works Council as a management tool to divide and conquer: Corporate whipsawing in the steel sector. Economic and Industrial Democracy, 42(3), 73–91. 
Armstrong, M. (2014). Armstrong's Handbook of Human Resource Management Practice (Thirtheenth edition ed.). Philadelphia: Ashford Color press Ltd.
Barik, P., & Pandey, B. B. (2016). Work-life Balance a Strategic Human Resource Policies and Practices followed by Indian Organizations. International Journal of Management & Social Sciences, 5(3), 427-435. 
Barr, E. (2020). 15 Essential HR Policies. 
Beer, M., Spector, B., Lawrence, P. R., Mills, D. Q., & Walton, R. E. (1984). Managing Human Assets.
Boehm, S. A., Schröder, H., & Bal, a. M. (2021). Age-Related Human Resource Management Policies and Practices: Antecedents, Outcomes, and Conceptualizations. Work, Aging and Retirement, 7(No 4), 257-272. 
Bonareri, O. J. (2019). Percieved Effect of Human Resource Policies on Employee Performance at Elgon Tea Factory, Transnzoia County, Kenya. (Master of Business Administration). University of Nairobi, Kenya. 
Bond, T. (2007). Applying the Rasch Model Fundamental Measurement in the Human Sciences (3rd Edition ed.). New York: Routledge.
Borman, W. C., & Motowidlo, S. J. (1997). Task Performance and Contextual Performance: The Meaning for Personnel Selection Research. Human Performance, 10(2), 99-109. 
Charnwood. (2007). Performance through People Strategy. Retrieved from https://www.charnwood.gov.uk/files/papers/cabinet_item_10_appendix_29_april_2004/Cabinet+Item+10+Appendix+29+April+2004.pdf
Chelimo, S. J. (2017). Effect of Human Resource Policies on Employees Performance: A Case Study of Co-operative Bank. (Masters in Business Administration). United States International University, Africa, 
Chukwuka, E. J., & Nwakoby, N. P. (2018). Effect of Human Resource Management Pratices on Employee Retention and Performance in Nigerian Insurance Industry. World Journal of Research and Review, 6(4), 27-41. 
Cooks-Campbell, A. (2022). Promotion policy guidelines and best practices. Retrieved from https://www.betterup.com/blog/promotion-policy
Danish, R., & Usman, A. (2010). Impact of Reward and Recognition on Job Satisfaction and Motivation: An Empirical study from Pakistan. International Journal of Business and Management, Vol. 5(No. 2). 
Dhungana, D. (2015). Human Resource Policy. Retrieved from https://tyrocity.com/mba/distinguish-between-overall-human-resource-policy-and-specific-human-resource-policy-with-its-features-enh#:~:text=Thus%2C%20overall%20human%20resource%20policy,specific%20human%20resource%20management%20component.
Ezejiofor, R. A., Peace, N. N., & Okoye, J. F. N. (2015). Appraisal of Human Resources Management in a performance of Nigerian Business Organizations. International Journal of Advanced Research, 3(10), 922-928. 
Gomez-Mejia, L., Balkin, D., & Cardy, R. (2009). Managing Human Resources (6th Edition ed.). Delhi, India: Prentice Hall of India Learning.
Grobler, P. A., & Warnich, S. (2005). Human Resource Management in South Africa: Thomson.
Guest, D. (1989). Personnel and HRM: Can you tell the difference? Personnel Management, 24, 48-51. 
Guest, D. E., Michie, J., Conway, N., & Sheehan, M. (2003). Human Resource Management and Corporate Performance in the UK. British Journal of Industrial Relations, 41(2), 291-314. 
Hameed, A., Ramzan, M., Zubair, H. M. K., Ali, G., & Arslan, M. (2014). Impact of Compensation on Employee Performance (Empirical Evidence fromBanking Sector of Pakistan). International Journal of Business and Social Science, 5(2), 302-309. 
Hazra, K., Sengupta, P. P., & Ghosh, P. (2013). Impact of HR Policies on Employee’s Performance: An Empirical Study of Selected Hospitality Organizations. SIT Journal of Management, 3(2), 654-774. 
Holliday, M. (2021). 20 Must-Have HR Policies for your Employee Handbook. Retrieved from https://www.netsuite.com/portal/resource/articles/human-resources/hr-policies.shtml
Jackson, S., May, K., & Whitney, K. (1995). Understanding the Dynamics of Diversity in Decision Making Teams. In R. S. Guzzo, E. and Associates (Eds) (Ed.), Team Effectiveness in Decision Making in Organizations. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Jagero, N., Dabale, W. P., & Nyauchi, M. (2014). The Relationship between Training and Employee Performance: The Case of Mutare City Council, Zimbabwe. International Journal of Human Resource Studies, 4(4). 
Jimoh, O., & Abdulkadir, D. S. (2011). Strategic Human Resource Management and Organizational Performance in the Nigerian Manufacturing Sector: An Empirical Investigation. International Journal of Business and Management, 6(9), 45-70. 
Johnson, J. H., & Bonds, J. M. (2020). Does Your Firm Have Reputational Equity? Retrieved from https://kenaninstitute.unc.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Firm-Reputational-Equity-updated.pdf
Kagan, J. (2020). Workers' Compensation: What It Is, How It Works, and Who Pays. Retrieved from https://www.investopedia.com/terms/w/workers-compensation.asp
Kapur, R. (2020). Human Resources Policies and Procedure. University of Delhi.  
Katou, A. A., & Budhwar, P. S. (2007). The Effect of Human Resource Management Policies on Organizational Performance in Greek Manufacturing Firms. Thunderbird International Business Review, 49(1), 1-35. 
Khan, A. (2015). An empirical analysis of HR policies on the performance of employees in banking industry: A case study of State Bank of India (SBI). International Journal of Multidisciplinary Research and Development, 2(2), 308-312. 
Koch, M. J., & McGrath, R. G. (1996). Improving Labor Productivity: Human Resource Management Policies Do Matter. Strategic Management Journal, 13, 335-354. 
Kwenin, D. O., Muathe, S., & Nzulwa, R. (2013). The Influence of Employee Rewards, Human Resource Policies and Job Satisfaction on the Retention of Employees in Vodafone Ghana Limited. European Journal of Business and Management, 5(12), 13-20. 
Maina, B. (2017). Effect of Strategic Human resource Management Practices on Organizational Performance in the Kenyan Public Sector. European Journal of Business and Strategic Management, 2(1), 69-92. 
Manhotoma, M. G., & Delly Mahachi. (2014). A Comparative Analysis of Human Resource Policies and Practices on Employee Performance and Sustainability of Hotel Organisations In Botswana. European Scientific Journal. 
Mozael, B. M. (2015). Impact of Training and Development Programs on Employee Performance. International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications, 5(11), 38 - 42. 
O'Donovan, D. (2018). Diversity and Inclusion in the Workplace. In C. Machado & J. P. Davim (Eds.), Organizational Behaviour and Human Resource Management. Springer International Publishing.
Ogbogu, F. O., & Sadamoro, O. C. (2022). Effect of Compensation Policy on Employee Performance In Ekiti State. British Journal of Management and Marketing Studies, 5(2), 53-63. 
Ologunde, A. O., Monday, J. U., & James-Unam, F. C. (2015). The Impact of Strategic Human Resource Management on Competitiveness of Small and Medium-scale Enterprises in the igerian Hospitality Industry. An International Multidisciplinary Journal, Ethiopia, 9(4), 264-276. 
PeoplePointHR. (2018). Equality and diversity policy assistance. Retrieved from https://peoplepointhr.co.uk/hr-solutions/equality-and-diversity-policy/#:~:text=The%20role%20of%20an%20equality,issue%20will%20be%20taken%20seriously.
Pfeffer, J. (1995). Producing Sustainable Competitive Advantage Through the Effective Management of People. Academy of Management Perspectives, 9(1), 55-72. 
Pidd, K., Kostadinov, V., & Roche, A. (2016). Do workplace policies work? An examination of the relationship between alcohol and other drug policies and workers' substance use. International Journal of Drug Policy, 28(48-54). 
Pule, S., Mwesigye, J., Kanyangabo, E., & Mbago, R. (2014). Human Resource Policy and Job Satisfaction of Employees in Knowledge-Based Enterprises: A Comparative Study of the Indigenous and Expatriate Teaching Staffs of Kampala International University, Uganda. Global Journal of Human Resource Management, 2(3), 13-27. 
Quain, S. (2018). Advantages & Disadvantages of Business Rules. Retrieved from https://smallbusiness.chron.com/advantages-disadvantages-business-rules-32236.html
Rajsheka, V. (2012). Top 8 Essential Characteristics of a Sound Human Resource Policy.  Retrieved from https://www.shareyouressays.com/knowledge/top-8-essential-characteristics-of-a-sound-human-resource-policy/94594
Rastogi, S. (2020). HR Policies. Retrieved from https://www.slideshare.net/Srastogi1959/chapter-2-hr-policies
ReferenceForBusiness. (2022). Human Resource Policies. Retrieved from https://www.referenceforbusiness.com/small/Eq-Inc/Human-Resource-Policies.html
Rudman, R. S. (2010). Human Respurces Management in New Zealand. Auckland New Zealand Pearson Education New Zealand 
Sandhya, M. (2020). HR Policies. Retrieved from https://www.economicsdiscussion.net/human-resource-management/hr-policies/hr-policies/32441
Shaheen, A., Naqvi, S. M. H., & Khan, M. A. (2013). Employees Training and Organizational Performance: Mediation by Employees Performance. Interdisciplinary Journal of Contemporary Research in Business, 5(4), 490-503. 
Shaw, J. B., & Barrett-Power, E. (1998). The Effects of Diversity on Small Work Group Processes and Performance. Human Relations, Vol. 51(No. 10), 13-25. 
SHRM. (2022). Sexual Harassment Policy and Complaint/Investigation Procedure. Retrieved from https://www.shrm.org/resourcesandtools/tools-and-samples/policies/pages/sexual-harassment-policy.aspx
Sirbu, J., & Alexandrescu, R. (2014). Human Resources Policy - Importance and Applicability. Calitatea: Acces la Success, 15(S3), 23-21. 
Tabouli, E. M. A., Habtoor, N. A., & Nashief, M. (2016). The Impact of Human Resources Management on Employee Performance: Organizational Commitment Mediator Variable. Asian Social Science, 12(9), 176-192. 
Takeuchi, N. (2009). How Japanese manufacturing firms align their human resource policies with business strategies: testing a contingency performance prediction in a Japanese context. The International Journal of Human Resource Management, Vol. 20(1), 34-56. 
Triantafillidou, E., & Koutroukis, T. (2022). Employee Involvement and Participation as a Function of Labor Relations and Human Resource Management: Evidence from Greek Subsidiaries of Multinational Companies in the Pharmaceutical Industry. Administrative Sciences, 12(41), 1-13. 
Ungerson, C., & Yeandle, S. (2005). Care Workers and Work—Life Balance: The Example of Domiciliary Careworkers. In D. M. Houston (Ed.), Work-Life Balance in the 21st Century (1 ed., pp. pp 246-262): Palgrave Macmillan 
Werbel, J. D., & DeMarie, S. M. (2005). Aligning Strategic Human Resource Management and Person-Environment Fit. Human Resource Management Review, 15, 247-262. 
Williams, C. (2007). Research Methods. Journal of Business & Economic Research, 5(3), 65-72. 



PART 1: Demographic Data
1.	Gender? 
Male (   ) 	Female (   ) 	Others (   )
2.	Age?
Below 25 (    )                25-34 (   )		35-44 (   )	45-54 (   )	Above 50 (   )
3.	Number of years on the job
Less than 1 year (   )		1-3 years (   )	4-5 years (   )	6-10 years (   )
4.	Job Position/Grade level:
Junior Level (   )	Mid-Level (   )	Senior Level (   )	
PART 2: Human Resource Policy
SD = Strongly Disagree, D = Disagree, N = Neutral, A = Agree, SA = Strongly Agree
Variables	SD	D	N	A	SA
5	My organization takes Equal Opportunity as a core human resource policy					
6	My organization Managing diversity as a core human resource policy					
7	My organization takes Age and employment as a core human resource policy					
8	My organization takes Promotion as a core human resource policy					
9	My organization takes Work-life balance as a core human resource policy					
10	My organization takes Employee development as a core human resource policy					
11	My organization takes Compensation as a core human resource policy					
12	My organization takes Employee Involvement and Participation as a core human resource policy					
13	My organization takes Employee Relations as a core human resource policy					
14	My organization takes Recruitment and Selection as a core human resource policy					
15	My organization takes Health and safety as a core human resource policy					
16	My organization takes Sexual Harassment as a core human resource policy					
17	My organization takes Substance abuse as a core human resource policy					

PART 3: Effect of Human Resource Policy on Employee Performance
SD = Strongly Disagree, D = Disagree, N = Neutral, A = Agree, SA = Strongly Agree
Variables	SD	D	N	A	SA
18	Presence of a human resource policies has improved my understanding of performance standards expected of me					
19	Presence of a human resource policies has led me to teach and disseminate useful skills and knowledge to my colleagues					
20	I attribute my ability to use resources effectively and efficiently to human resource policy					
21	Human resource policy has helped me prioritize tasks according to urgency in order to meet deadlines and
objectives in good time					
22	HR policy has helped me set clear and realistic goals to achieve in a given time period					
23	Presence of a HR policy has helped me display extra effort whenever necessary to complete my tasks					
24	HR policy has helped me to show empathy, listen to fellow employee problems and support them whenever they ask for help					
25	HR policy has helped me get the cooperation I need from my team members to be productive					
26	Presence of a HR policy has helped me make few mistakes while performing my duties					

PART 4: Effect of Human Resource Policy on Employee Performance II
27. In general, do you think human resource policies at your organization affects your performance? Yes(   )     No(   )
28. Which of the policies do you think has the most effect on your performance
Equal Opportunity		Employee development	
Managing diversity		Compensation	
Age and employment		Employee Involvement and Participation	
Promotion		Employee Relations	
Work-life balance		Recruitment and Selection	
Health and safety		Sexual Harassment	
Substance abuse			

